README.md, before:

# DaveLab

Short, guided crash-courses for important every day skills.

Each course is made of a small number of short sections, around 20 minutes each.

Each section includes a `README.md` file with the course material and any relevant source code or resource files.

These lessons are intended to be interactive - work along in your terminal and do the examples as you read.

These short chapters can't teach you everything you need to be an expert but, hopefully, they should help give some insight, or a better mental model, into important engineering skills and topics.

## Navigating the Chapters

This project is structured as a `git` repo, intended to be hosted on a platform where you can easily view `README.md` files in a web browser (like `github`).

Clone this repository so you have a local copy to work in. In your shell, navigate to the directory for each chapter as you go.

The chapters are sorted numerically. Start at chapter '01' and continue in order.

Each chapter has a `README.md` file with the course material, as well as one or more other example files. This means you can read the source material in the browser, via `github` UI, while you work in a terminal. Try putting your browser on one side of your desktop, and your terminal on the other side, so they both take up exactly half of the screen.

![image](./images/side-by-side.png)

Each section will briefly cover the material, then explain how you can try it out and experiment.

## Contents

- [Developer Productivity](./01_developer-productivity/README.md)

Commit message:

WIP - working on tmux config section.

README.md, after:

# DaveLab

## Objective

The objective of this project is to guide other software engineers through some of the important concepts and systems that they encounter at work every day.

The goal is not to create a comprehensive guide or semester long courses, but to walk thorough the basics - focusing on what is practical and relevant for your daily needs - and reinforcing that with some simple exercises.

The sections should be short (around 20 minutes) and usually just require reading along and trying examples on your system, or typing out and running some simple code samples.

Ideally, this would be a series of videos, where you can just watch and follow along in your terminal or editor, but recording, editing, and hosting these videos is not something I'm prepared to do.

## Overview

Short, guided crash-courses for important every day skills.

Each course is made of a small number of short sections.

Each section includes a `README.md` file with the course material and any relevant source code or resource files.

These lessons are intended to be interactive - work along in your terminal and do the examples as you read.

These short chapters can't teach you everything you need to be an expert but, hopefully, they should help give some insight, or a better mental model, into important engineering skills and topics. Each section should have

## Navigating the Chapters

This project is structured as a `git` repo, intended to be hosted on a platform where you can easily view `README.md` files in a web browser (like `github`).

Clone this repository so you have a local copy to work in. In your shell, navigate to the directory for each chapter as you go.

The chapters are sorted numerically. Start at chapter '01' and continue in order.

Each chapter has a `README.md` file with the course material, as well as one or more other example files. This means you can read the source material in the browser, via `github` UI, while you work in a terminal. Try putting your browser on one side of your desktop, and your terminal on the other side, so they both take up exactly half of the screen.

![image](./images/side-by-side.png)

Each section will briefly cover the material, then explain how you can try it out and experiment.

## Contents

- [01 - Developer Productivity](./01_developer-productivity/README.md)
- 02 - Reading and Editing Code (vs. _writing_ code)
- 03 - Systems Thinking, Feedback Control, Re-framing Complex Problems, and Modeling
- 04 - Type Systems
- 05 - Learning About Your OS (with Linux)


## TODO

- V1.0:
    - finish developer productivity course
    - references and links
