_using_the_shell/index.md, before:

---
title: Shell Intro
layout: default
lesson: 0
---
# Using the Shell

{: .warning }
This module is still WIP and not ready for review.
<br>
I plan to re-organize and edit this content a bit more, because some sections just feel like random collections of facts instead of cohesive groups of related topics.
<br>
This module is also not as 'interactive' as I would like. I plan to add one more chapter at the end with a guided "lab" that will give some practice with the things that are covered here.
<br>
I'm also still collecting generally useful 'one-liners' to include in the last section, but I might just merge that into the "lab".

## Overview

By the end of this module you will be familiar with a hand-full of the most common and useful shell commands for daily tasks, how to combine them together into 'one-liners' to complete a task, and we'll see some real world examples.

## How to Explore this Course

Follow along with this text, while typing the examples into your terminal.

Put your terminal next to your browser so you can read and follow the examples at the same time:

{: .full-image }
![image](../img/side-by-side.avif){:height="1200" width="1920"}

## Contents

{: .course-toc }
- [Finding help](./01_help-hisory)
- [Expansion and signals](./02_expansion-signals)
- [Combining commands - streams and pipes](./03_streams-and-pipes)
- [Useful commands for every day tasks](./04_commands)
- [Lab: Using the Shell](./05_lab1.md)

---

[NEXT >>](./01_help-hisory)

Commit message:

Updates, add callout to install coreutils with homebrew.

_using_the_shell/index.md, after:

---
title: Shell Intro
layout: default
lesson: 0
---
# Using the Shell

{: .warning }
This module is still WIP and not ready for review.
<br>
I plan to re-organize and edit this content a bit more, because some sections just feel like random collections of facts instead of cohesive groups of related topics.
<br>
This module is also not as 'interactive' as I would like. I plan to add one more chapter at the end with a guided "lab" that will give some practice with the things that are covered here.
<br>
I'm also still collecting generally useful 'one-liners' to include in the last section, but I might just merge that into the "lab".

## Overview

By the end of this module you will be familiar with a hand-full of the most common and useful shell commands for daily tasks, how to combine them together into 'one-liners' to complete a task, and we'll see some real world examples.

## Requirements

If you are on Mac, then you should [install Homebrew](https://docs.brew.sh/Installation). This is your best option for installing and managing software outside of the app store.

Many of the commands and programs used in this chapter are from the `coreutils` project. On a Linux system, these may already be installed in your base system. If they are not, then you should be able to install them with your system package manager.

```zsh
brew install coreutils
```

## How to Explore this Course

Follow along with this text, while typing the examples into your terminal.

Put your terminal next to your browser so you can read and follow the examples at the same time:

{: .full-image }
![image](../img/side-by-side.avif){:height="1200" width="1920"}

## Contents

{: .course-toc }
- [Finding help](./01_help-hisory)
- [Expansion and signals](./02_expansion-signals)
- [Combining commands - streams and pipes](./03_streams-and-pipes)
- [Useful commands for every day tasks](./04_commands)
- [Lab: Using the Shell](./05_lab1.md)

---

[NEXT >>](./01_help-hisory)
